[SWOOSH]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>JAN ENGELS-SMITH: I really see
humans as an advanced species.
>>REGINA MEREDITH: I do too.
>>ENGELS-SMITH: In the universe.
We're creating the
outcomes, and so all of life
is dependent on what
we're doing there.
And it feels like chaos.
It can feel like madness.
It can feel like destruction.
It can feel hopeless.
You know, you're just--
you're in this place of,
what in the world is going on?
>>REGINA: We are
all being tasked
with raising our frequencies
to go into harmony with Earth.
>>ENGELS-SMITH: The
way that I kind of
view going for a walk
in nature and you just
feel so much better,
it's because you're
surrounded with things
that don't have an ego.
What the spirits were
saying is all the answers
are available to you, but you're
not asking the right questions.
It's all working for the
evolution of humanity.
[THEME MUSIC]
>>REGINA: What the
world needs now
are philosophers and shamans
to make sense of the increasing
chaos, words and actions
that have real outcomes.
Toward that end, we're talking
with Jan Engels-Smith today,
a 21st century shaman who never
stopped seeking for the truth.
>>ENGELS-SMITH: [LAUGHS]
>>REGINA: And we
are going to look
at what we can do to bring
light and coherence back
to our lives.
A lot of people are
unglued right now, right?
In fact, we were
all talking about,
just as we're
taping this, this is
one of those kind of crazy
weeks with unstable energy
and actions happening
around the world
that empaths in particular
are all absorbing.
And how are you
faring with all that?
Have you felt some of that too?
Are you as crazy
as the rest of us?
>>ENGELS-SMITH: [LAUGHS]
I have felt some of that.
I have.
But one of the things--
well, people are talking about
how crazy it is and chaotic.
To me, that's all
part of the conditions
that we've called forth that
the Earth is going through.
And we as humans are
here on the planet,
incarnating at this time to
usher through as good humans
and really bring it forth.
>>REGINA: I agree.
And this is a particularly
important point
that comes up now and
then in interviews.
The Earth is going through
her own frequency shifts.
Some people think, oh, no, we're
already in the fifth dimension.
No, not physically, we
are not, or we would
have blown apart at the seams.
You don't go from material
to non-material in a couple
of decades or even millennia.
So this third going into
fourth dimensional Earth
is lifting her frequencies.
And the cosmos is
calling for it.
The sun, the great central
sun is calling for this.
We are going along for the ride.
And so let's talk about
what happens when--
we know this even when
other people around us
shift their frequency.
>>ENGELS-SMITH: That's right.
>>REGINA: And the
struggles that happen.
So let's talk about
what happens when
she moves her frequencies up
and we're living somewhere else.
>>ENGELS-SMITH: Right.
As the Earth frequencies go
up, we have to match that.
And it's interesting, because
in shamanism the Earth frequency
was stable for a long time, and
that's how we did our drumming.
I don't know if
I've ever told that.
>>REGINA: No, yeah, tell us.
>>ENGELS-SMITH: Yeah.
But I learned how to
drum at the rate of seven
megahertz per second,
because that was
the Earth's kind of frequency.
And that brought us
all in alignment,
and we sort of
reconnected to our core.
The Earth beat is kind of like
the first beat that we hear,
only it's in our mother's
heartbeat, you know?
And so when you can
simulate that with a drum,
it takes you back into this very
altered state of knowingness.
And so that's--
>>REGINA: In harmony
with the Earth.
>>ENGELS-SMITH: In harmony
with the Earth, harmony
with all life and
everything that exists.
But the Earth's frequencies
are changing so fast.
There's no way that
you could drum [LAUGHS]
at those types of levels.
But we have to bring
our frequencies up
or we feel like we're bombarded,
and it feels like chaos.
It can feel like madness.
It can feel like destruction.
It can feel hopeless.
You know, you're just--
you're in this place of,
what in the world is going on?
But with doing particular
practices-- and that's
what I'm all about.
I'm doing the healings
and doing the practices.
You want to keep bringing
up that frequency
so that you're in
harmony with it.
And that fifth dimension
that you're talking about,
that's a dimension of love.
>>REGINA: Right.
And that is an aspect
and a dimension of Earth
and a dimension of us.
But where we live
in this terra firma,
that's not fifth dimensional.
>>ENGELS-SMITH: No.
>>REGINA: And people are getting
confused over that message.
And I've clarified that
with other channelers
that say, yes, that is
not your physical Earth,
but that's where your
being is attempting
to resonate in your own
multidimensional self.
>>ENGELS-SMITH: And as
that resonance continues,
then the physical
world will shift.
And we talked about that before.
>>REGINA: Yeah, we did.
And we're talking about this.
This is what's coming to mind.
We read books.
We watch films
about someone who's
just been on the hamster wheel.
They're just grinding it out.
They're going to win, win,
win, competing with each other.
They're at the top of the heap.
And something happens and
cracks in their lives.
And normally, the
way that story goes
is something happens
where they either
find their heart,
their compassion, how
important other
people are to them,
and the material part
just starts dropping away
in terms of importance.
And isn't that what's
happening right now?
As a materialistic species,
we've explored that to the max.
And the Earth
rising, I think it's
kind of indicating to us the
material structures around us
must transform and change.
And that includes our own,
and our own attachments
to these things.
>>ENGELS-SMITH: It
does, absolutely.
But I like to look at
things without the need
for catastrophe, you know?
>>REGINA: Yeah, we don't
have to catastrophize it.
Yeah.
>>ENGELS-SMITH:
How can you do it?
I have a favorite shaman-- a
favorite story about a shaman.
And I can hear my students
laughing right now,
because I tell this
story all the time.
>>REGINA: OK.
>>ENGELS-SMITH: They
know it as well as I do.
But this is a true story.
It took place in Machu
Picchu down in Peru.
And there was fires down there.
They were out of control,
and it's a sacred site,
and the site was
being threatened.
So the council that
runs Machu Picchu
called in shamans to
put out the fire, which
is one of my favorite
parts of the story.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
Yeah.
>>ENGELS-SMITH: You
know, it's shamans.
And so the shamans
arrived, and they
started doing what shamans do.
You go out, you
drum, you sing, you
connect with the elements, and
all those different things.
But this one
particular shaman, she
wanted to have a
little hut made.
In Lakota, we call it a wickiup.
It's like a private little
sweat lodge that's dark,
and you go in there and pray.
So she went in there, and she
prayed for a day and a half,
and the fires went out.
And everybody knew it was her.
It wasn't what the
other ones were doing.
And they said,
how'd you do that?
How'd you put out the fires?
And she said, I found where I
was out of alignment in myself.
And when I righted that, the
external world then changed.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>ENGELS-SMITH: Profound.
>>REGINA: It is profound.
>>ENGELS-SMITH: And
that's what I mean.
It's not about looking out here.
It's like, what are you
doing on the inside?
>>REGINA: Yeah.
It's all connected.
The Earth's emotional
and mental bodies
are connected with our
emotional and mental bodies,
and we're connected with one
another the more each one of us
can come into alignment.
And we have the courage to let
go of what has to be let go of.
>>ENGELS-SMITH: Yes.
>>REGINA: I mean,
we are going to have
to let go of some elements
of who we thought we were
and what life was about.
>>ENGELS-SMITH: Mm-hmm.
And to change.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>ENGELS-SMITH: People want
everything to be different,
but they're not willing
to change themselves.
>>REGINA: This is huge.
>>ENGELS-SMITH: Yeah, it's huge.
And that's to me the ticket.
It's like, if you want
things to be different,
how are you going
to be different?
And if you just keep
asking that question--
and it's really about
your connection to spirit.
I mean, in the
simplest terms, it's
that whole connection
to your inner self,
your inner dimensional self
and your spiritual self
and how you are connected
to everything else.
And we can give lip
service to this.
Like you said, you
can read books.
You can watch movies.
But it's the practice.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
>>ENGELS-SMITH: It's
the practice of,
how are you changing inside?
And then that is
going to be reflected
to the outside reality
in what you see
and what you're going through.
>>REGINA: And this requires
not just courage, but humility.
>>ENGELS-SMITH: Oh,
a lot of humility.
>>REGINA: And a lot of people--
the ego does not want
to have to humble itself
in order to make these
changes that are necessary.
But I think if we all understand
everyone's in the same boat.
We are all being tasked
with raising our frequencies
to go into harmony with Earth.
And if we understand
that, all of us
are going to have
to say, sh, OK.
This isn't working
for me anymore.
We all have to do it.
And it's not a shameful
thing to have to change.
>>ENGELS-SMITH: It's
a wonderful thing.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
But if some people feel like,
I'm not going to admit it.
[GRUMBLING] You know?
We can't do that anymore.
That time has passed.
>>ENGELS-SMITH: Yeah, it's
morphing and changing.
Nature is always doing it,
and you can look to nature
and really feel connected to
the environment, because that's
where we need to stay
very connected to.
And if we look at the things
that morph and change--
which is constant.
What is the saying?
The only thing that's
constant is change?
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>ENGELS-SMITH: [LAUGHS]
>>REGINA: Yes.
It is change.
It's true.
And as the Earth is
continuing to change,
the best we can
do for ourselves--
and this comes up
in almost every
show I do now-- to be in
touch with the nature,
to be in touch with the sky, the
sun, the trees, the moon, all
of it, because that is our
most direct path to staying
in harmony with the
Earth is to be with her,
and the wisdom that comes
from her and the calm.
The calm that comes
from her as well.
>>ENGELS-SMITH: Yeah.
You were talking
about the ego earlier,
and the way that I kind of
view going for a walk in nature
and you just feel
so much better,
it's because you're
surrounded with things
that don't have any ego.
>>REGINA: Right.
Exactly.
You're so right on that.
Maybe sometimes best
just to walk alone too so
at least you only have
to deal with yours.
So one of the things you
were told by your guides
is that this is the
fork in the road.
We have come there.
And I've been calling it a
bifurcation of consciousness.
And we've arrived.
>>ENGELS-SMITH: We've arrived.
We're there.
>>REGINA: And so let's talk
about what they told you
and what the options are.
And I think most people
will be able to relate
very strongly with this.
>>ENGELS-SMITH: You either go
into the madness or the chaos
and live it and worry about
it and be anxious about it--
>>REGINA: Refuse to change.
>>ENGELS-SMITH:
Refuse to change.
Or you say, OK, I'm here.
I say yes.
If you want to use
the word surrender--
not everybody likes that word.
I happen to like it.
But you know, I am
available to this.
And you start learning.
You start learning
how to be connected.
And there are so many
wonderful options out there
in the world today to do that
that I think in shamanism
at least, it's experiential.
It's not like you're
learning from a book
or you're learning from videos.
You're doing it
through activities.
You learn who your helpers
are, who your guides are.
It doesn't matter
if you want to go
the angelic route or the
deity route or whatever,
but you start
building relationships
with these beings,
with the Earth beings,
with the spirits of the land.
All of these different things,
whatever that road is for you.
But you have to
start a practice.
I mean, we are spiritual
beings, and we need
to have a spiritual practice.
And that means you're
working with spirit.
[LAUGHS]
>>REGINA: Right.
Exactly.
And another point
that you make is
that we're not intended to
go through this as loners.
The time of the
competitive loner, really
the patriarchal era,
is drawing to a close.
And we're not here to
compete with one another.
We're here to all rise together.
And so what does
that mean to you,
and how do you work that with
your students, your family,
and your friends in
terms of helping one
another go through
this together?
And you can-- any
stories you have
or examples of people
who've really had to let go
and had very surprising
things happen
that they've turned into gold in
their own spirit, please share.
>>ENGELS-SMITH: [LAUGHS] Sure.
Well, to me, my life has been
doing ceremony for the last 30
years, working with the spirits
and having all different kinds
of transformations take place.
And I feel like one of
the most important things
is like you were saying,
the non-competitive,
and that people
learn that we have
to work in unity
and collaboration
and support and love.
And when you do those
types of things,
the spirits call it-- you become
masters of loving kindness.
And that just automatically
raises your energy.
Competition and loving kindness
are completely different
fields.
>>REGINA: Opposite fields.
>>ENGELS-SMITH: Yeah.
And so just even saying
the word can kind of like--
oh, I'm going to be
in my loving kindness
today is this completely
different energy altogether.
>>REGINA: It is.
And I mean, for
myself, I found--
I realized this.
I guess I was in my 20s.
I thought, whenever
I was feeling blue,
like something wasn't
happening that I thought
was going to happen or
I was waiting too long
for a job to come
through or something--
because the world
of TV is cruel.
There's a lot of waiting.
And just that anxiety.
Where's my next
paycheck coming from?
I always thought,
well, if I can just
do something nice for someone,
I would shift my focus
and think, what can I do?
Who can I call?
Just offer something
nice into the world.
A kind-- bake a cake,
whatever, for someone else.
And that would always--
psh.
That totally flipped
the energy for me.
It always has.
>>ENGELS-SMITH: Yeah.
And as you're saying
that, it can sound really
Pollyanna or trite, but there's
such a deep level to it,
because if it's coming
from you authentically--
and again, it's this
connection that I
think that is so important.
I was adopted into a Lakota
family about 28 years ago,
and one of the things that
I learned very early on
is a belief that they
hold that you're actually
born with 405 helping spirits.
>>REGINA: Oh,
that's interesting.
>>ENGELS-SMITH: [LAUGHS] Now,
that's not a literal number,
but it's a number
of huge quantity.
And like you said, we're
not here to do it alone.
Like, these spirits
are assigned to you.
Like, you are their
mission, you know?
You're born.
This little soul comes in.
You are their mission.
But you have to learn
how to dialogue.
You have to learn how
to connect with them.
You have to learn to trust
them and them trust you.
And you have to include
them in your life.
And when you do that,
you'll find that everything
starts to shift.
Your responses are
different to things.
Triggers go away.
A whole-- a piece
sets in, a wholeness
sets in, because
there's this trust that
is innate to the soul.
It's innate to our
soul's existence.
Trust, joy, love, unconditional.
That's all at our core.
And when we can make
these relationships that
feel that way, we thrive.
And it doesn't matter what
the outside world is doing,
because you're set in yourself.
And the more people that can do
that, that outside world will
change into the dimension.
>>REGINA: The fire goes out.
>>ENGELS-SMITH:
The fire goes out.
>>REGINA: Like with the shaman.
>>ENGELS-SMITH:
The fire goes out.
>>REGINA: Yes.
And you brought up a point
that I usually don't talk about
in these interviews.
Only in my private life.
And that has more to
do with the uniqueness
of the human species.
Not every species in
the cosmos has guides.
They don't all have guides
because it's more of a--
a species that is more--
how do I say this?
Spirit and the body
have developed together
from the beginning, so there's
not that amnesia through trauma
that we've gone through
again and again and again.
And I think that poses us a
unique opportunity, but also
a unique challenge.
Because of all the
trauma, most of us
have been cut off from direct
communication with our soul.
And this is what you're
trying to bring back
through your work.
You're helping
people bring back.
>>ENGELS-SMITH: That's right.
>>REGINA: And not to feel
like there's something
wrong with us.
We are a unique species
in the universe.
And trauma-- and
also, I would go
so far as to say even
having been taken advantage
of by other realms at times has
kept us disconnected from self
to the extent we need guides.
And that's why they're here
and why they're assigned to us.
We need them.
And it's silly to
not call on them
when we have this amnesia
of who we are going on.
>>ENGELS-SMITH: That's right.
The forgetting.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>ENGELS-SMITH: And
you know, I really
see humans as an advanced
species in the universe.
We're dealing with emotions,
spirituality, mental clarity,
in our physicality.
Not other species really
deal with all that.
>>REGINA: And free will.
>>ENGELS-SMITH: And free will.
That's the ticket.
Yeah.
The spirits call
it sacred choice.
You have your sacred choice.
And they're going to give you
all of these sets of things
to try to balance out and then
take away your remembering
and give you free will.
>>REGINA: That's a lot.
>>ENGELS-SMITH: That is a lot.
But it's calculus instead of
math, or instead of arithmetic.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
>>ENGELS-SMITH: It's
a high-level thing.
And so yes, those guides are
here to help us through it.
Because as the creator
beings that we are,
we're creating the outcomes.
And so all of life is dependent
on what we're doing there,
as far as that creation--
>>REGINA: It is.
That's particularly interesting.
When you take this unique
species called human beings--
unique, unique species--
that is trying to bring
all this together,
that has an incredibly
refined part of ourselves,
a part that at one
time could create
at the speed of thought
that's now slowed down
into this dimension.
So here you have us, all of our
uniqueness, all of our beliefs,
this collective subconscious
constantly influencing us,
and we're creating.
[LAUGHS] It's like we're
behind the wheel of that car.
And sometimes we're not
creating very responsibly.
But we're creating.
>>ENGELS-SMITH: Yeah, we're
creating out of emotion.
And see, all those different
examples you just gave,
they're not emotional.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>ENGELS-SMITH: And the
emotion is the element of love,
and that's why it's
advanced, because now they've
thrown in emotion.
And you have to deal with that.
But I think it's exciting.
And you know, I get jazzed with
what we're capable of doing.
And not that the state of the
world can't be sad at times,
but I just feel like there's
such a bigger picture.
And I'm always seeing things
from a bigger picture.
And I've learned how to do that.
There's actually levels
in the awareness scale
that you can function on.
And I move out into
different states of awareness
and look at a different
issue that way.
And it's fascinating in
how they blend into--
it's all working for
the greater good.
It's all working for the
evolution of humanity.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
I think that would
be-- if all of us
can keep that in mind,
this might be painful,
but it's all looking
to advance us.
The Earth is advancing.
The cosmos is advancing.
So it is for our advancement.
And thank you for just reminding
everyone, just do that.
Sometimes when I feel
like I'm not really--
I'm a little too emotional
and too close to something,
what I do is I'm a bird.
I turn myself into an eagle.
And then I fly
above the situation
and I watch back on myself and
the others involved in the play
and see what we're each doing.
And it's a wonderful
place to come from,
because you can dispassionately
see all of the emotions
and the objectives
and the agendas
and everything else playing
out dispassionately.
And then you come back in
your body with that knowledge.
So I find a bird's eye
view is very helpful.
>>ENGELS-SMITH: Yes, that's
a great way to do it.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
That's just one little-- but
you have your other techniques.
One of them is you
create this super self.
And you have-- and I've
listened to your meditations,
and so one of them is you
help guide people through this
by helping them understand
that incredibly unique, divine,
refined, highly developed
spiritual aspect of self,
and move the rest
of you into it.
So let's talk about
what you're trying
to do in these meditations
and in your work
with this super self avatar.
>>ENGELS-SMITH: Avatar.
Well, very much that,
that I believe that most
of your soul-- and I work--
I consider myself a soul doctor.
[LAUGHS] You know,
we have doctors
for everything
else but the soul,
and that's the most
important part of of you.
It's the part that lives on.
>>REGINA: In some places,
they call them witch doctors.
>>ENGELS-SMITH:
Well, there you go.
That's fine.
Whatever.
Whatever the case, you know?
And the soul is really
just slightly in you.
A tiny percentage of it is
actually animating your body.
And I like to think of it
almost like a giant triangle
over the top of your head.
And the apex of that
triangle is setting down
into your pineal gland, and it's
kind of animating your body.
But the rest of you is
out in its gloriousness,
unwounded and without all the
confines of physical reality
and the wounds and all
the different stuff,
that you can go and experience
and feel your vastness
like the size of the sky
where there's galaxies
and stars between yourselves.
You're just really vast.
And when you're in that
state of well-being,
your vibration is very high.
And when you're in that
state of high vibration,
you can attract to yourself
things very quickly.
And that's the difference
from somebody that instantly
manifests and
somebody that doesn't.
It's the state of
vibration that they're in.
And so when you can
bring your vibration up
into these really
high levels and have
that awareness of
your super self,
then you can call
to you from what
I call the fields of all
possible possibilities,
and bring those things
into your heart.
And then bring them
down into your body,
which then theoretically,
you've actually
shifted into a different
version of yourself just then.
And it's a practice that
if it's done regularly--
>>REGINA: You do
the 21-day rule?
>>ENGELS-SMITH: Yeah, I do.
>>REGINA: That's
your practice, right?
>>ENGELS-SMITH: Yeah.
>>REGINA: To do the same
meditation for 21 days,
continue reinforcing that.
>>ENGELS-SMITH: Mm-hmm.
And I do it with my students.
And then we get together.
Like, I'll do it with a class.
And then we'll get
together afterwards,
and the feedback that I
get is just off the charts.
It's just--
>>REGINA: Well, it's a very
refined place to go and be.
And that's enough.
21 days is plenty
to instantiate that.
>>ENGELS-SMITH: Mm-hmm.
Yeah.
Well, they say it's 21 days
to break a habit, you know?
And so what you're
actually doing
is you're in instilling a
new habit of seeing yourself
in a different perspective.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
And so that's a big part
of what you work on.
And you have that
available on audiotapes.
I mean, well, downloads now.
I guess they're downloads.
They're recordings
people can download.
>>ENGELS-SMITH: Yeah if
people go to my website,
they can get it, you know?
And it's free.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
no, they're wonderful.
They're wonderful.
Yeah.
That was fun to play with
them, and I really enjoyed it.
And came out feeling very floaty
and wonderful and peaceful
and everything.
So I want to talk about-- these
are a couple specific things
that happened.
Now, these are stories.
You were in Egypt and
you said Pyramid of 11th.
What does that mean?
And all this stuff
started happening.
This other woman and Edgar
Cayce comes into the story.
Tell us what happened there and
why that was important for you.
>>ENGELS-SMITH: Well,
this was back in 1998.
So it was right--
I was new, relatively
new by maybe five or six
years of doing my practice.
And we went over there, and the
Pyramid of 11s is its nickname.
I don't actually remember
the name of the pyramid
that we were in.
[LAUGHS]
But we went in to
do this ceremony.
And this woman
just started going
into this really strange sound.
It was like this--
[CLICKING] [MUTTERING]
you know, just like--
it wasn't toning and
it wasn't singing.
It was just this strange
coding, it sounded like.
And so we did this
journey, and we
were journeying to the
other side of the North Star
where the pyramid
was pointing towards.
And when we got over
on the other side,
everybody had their
own experiences.
And mine is the one that really
shaped me in my shamanic work.
And the ceremony
took a long time.
We came back and
we were all spent.
So the decision was made that
we would go back to our rooms
and then reconvene
at around 7 o'clock.
Well, this one woman,
she went for a walk,
and she ended up
into a bookstore.
And--
>>REGINA: The one who had had
these sounds coming from her?
>>ENGELS-SMITH: No,
a different woman.
A different woman.
And this book falls off
the shelf and opens off--
opens up.
And it was talking
about in April of 1998,
which is when we were there,
that the third portal will open
out of a series of three
portals that will allow humans
to have access to things
that they've never had access
to before.
>>REGINA: Fascinating that was
at that time you were there.
>>ENGELS-SMITH: And
that was an Edgar Cayce
book that fell off the wall.
And the woman that
did the coding
had been to the other two
portals that they mentioned.
She had just flown in from them.
One was in "Bahini" I
think is how you say it.
It's in the Caribbean.
>>REGINA: Oh, the
Bimini Islands?
>>ENGELS-SMITH: Yes.
Bimini.
Bimini And the other
one was in the Yucatan.
And she had literally-- she
just joined our group out
of the blue, and
she was just flying
from these different places and
had that same coding experience
at those other two places.
And so this was
the third portal.
>>REGINA: What did this
come to mean to you,
these portals being open.
How did you understand that?
And also, if you care to
share, what happened to you
that really changed your life?
>>ENGELS-SMITH: Yeah.
Well-- [SHUDDER].
Well, there were so many things.
I mean, it's hard
to pinpoint it.
But what the spirits were
saying is all the answers--
all the answers are
available to you,
but you're not asking
the right questions.
And you're very much
stuck in paradigms
of what you think has happened.
And again, we're getting
a lot of Egyptologists
talking to us at the time.
[LAUGHS] You know?
They're going [GROAN].
>>REGINA: Yeah.
Yeah.
>>ENGELS-SMITH: And--
>>REGINA: There's some
flaws in that story.
>>ENGELS-SMITH: Yes.
So anyway, it took
a while for me
to get a handle on what had
happened because it was so big.
And I kept trying to get
back over on the other side
of the portal, but I couldn't.
I couldn't seem to do that.
But randomly, I
would end up there.
And so anyway, it moves
into a different story.
Can I tell you?
>>REGINA: Yeah, do.
>>ENGELS-SMITH: So I
put on this thing called
a vision quest every year.
In fact, we've done 36 of them.
And I have these
questers out there.
And I always journey
in the morning,
asking how I can
help them the best.
Because almost anybody
that's going on a vision
quest is interested in
connecting more solidly, more
definitively to some
kind of other power.
And so I'm in this
journey, and the next thing
I know, I'm being
catapulted into the future
and I'm working with
the descendants.
And I was like, oh, wow.
You're doing these
ceremonies the same way.
And they said, well, not really.
Take a closer look.
And what I realized was
sitting with us in the circle
were all these gods.
And in fact, the name of
the class that I have now
is called Sitting in
Circle with the Gods.
You know, but there
were all these gods.
And they said, one of
the reasons that humans
feel so disconnected is because
they have lost the connection
with the gods of their land.
That there's gods there
that have been danced to
and asked questions
for thousands of years.
And now all of a sudden
in this new world of ours,
we don't do it anymore.
>>REGINA: Oh, no.
You get your answers
from CNN or Fox
whatever your flavor
of reference is.
Wow.
Yeah.
>>ENGELS-SMITH: And
then we're feeling,
why am I feeling so
disconnected, you know?
So I told this to the group.
And there just wasn't
a dry eye in the group.
And you know, everybody's
heart was so open.
So we had this beautiful
view of Mount Hood.
I live in Oregon.
And this beautiful
view of Mount Hood.
So we decided that we would
make offerings and say
to the mountain, I want
to hear you, because--
oh, the spirits said
in the Northwest,
it's the god of the mountains.
And I'm sure it's that
way here in Boulder too.
It's god of the mountains.
So anyway, we just did these
beautiful offerings to them.
And that ceremony
went on for hours.
And people just stepped
up with these things
that they had made
from the forest.
And you know, I want to connect.
I want to connect.
So anyway, it was
gorgeous in itself.
That was in August.
Then in September,
I went to Tibet.
And most of the time
I wasn't with it.
And this is prior to--
this is 2005, so I don't even
know if there was cell phone--
I don't think so.
But anyway, there was
not the communication
that we have today.
We were finally
in this one place
that we turned the news on.
There was actually
a TV, you know?
And they had TV in the lobby.
And we turned the
news on, and it
said that Mount St.
Helen had erupted again.
Now, she originally
erupted in the '80s,
but this eruption made
international news.
And so I was like, oh my god.
And so I went in
to do a journey,
and they said, we heard
you, and we are talking.
And it is a shaman's dream
to have an active volcano
that you can speak with.
This is the mother talking.
>>REGINA: Oh, wow.
>>ENGELS-SMITH: [LAUGHS] And
so that just really changed
my life.
I started doing
journeys to this volcano
daily and developing all
different kinds of coursework
around it in how to use the
information that the spirits
are giving us to change
our lives and to help us,
because they're
constantly trying to help
us have better existences.
>>REGINA: Oh, they never stop
trying to get our attention.
We're just not listening
a lot of the time.
That's the issue, because
we're so distracted and busy.
So I want to also ask
about this other--
this is another great
story about where
you have other beings, other
entities that are interfering
with you, and curses that
have been put on each other,
and so forth.
And right now, a lot of people
are feeling cursed kind of.
>>ENGELS-SMITH: Oh, I'm
sure that that's true.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>ENGELS-SMITH: [LAUGHS]
>>REGINA: But before we go into
this story about a child with
night terrors--
I love this story--
let's talk about hands-on
how you would assist someone
in learning to go
into relationship
with the gods of their native
land, wherever they are?
Including if you're
in the middle
of a city, an urban area.
>>ENGELS-SMITH: Yeah.
Well, to me, being a
shamanic practitioner
and practicing shamanism, the
most important thing to do
is learn how to
dialogue, how to connect.
And in shamanism, we
do it through a thing
called journeying.
And the reason I like
journeying so much
is because it
immediately moves you
into your right side
of your brain, which
is where all of this
is taking place,
where the spirits are alive
and well and you can see them.
I call it-- it's where you're
clairs are, your clairaudient,
clairsentient,
clairvoyant, you know--
>>REGINA: I have to say,
I physically feel that.
If I'm talking to guides,
I feel it trickling down
through literally the right side
of my brain and head and face
and everything.
It's quite literal.
>>ENGELS-SMITH: And
that's that active side.
And so there's a
lot of things that
will stimulate that, meditation
being very big on it.
But it's hard to
learn how to meditate.
I mean, I've been a meditator
since I was in my teens,
and it takes years and
years and years of practice.
Where journeying, you
can learn in a weekend
and you can be pretty good
at it, because it's active.
It's an active brain.
Instead of turning
off the brain,
you're just moving over
into the right side
and you're activating that
part, and so it's much easier.
>>REGINA: So just
briefly, what do you
mean by journeying in
the context you use it?
>>ENGELS-SMITH: Sure.
Journeying is going
into an altered state
which is, again,
that altered state is
moving into this shifting.
And it's done by closing--
you're blindfolding
yourself actually,
because light
actually stimulates
the left side of the brain.
But closing your eyes and
blindfolding yourself,
and then using the drum
as a sonic instrument,
or rattles that
will reconnect you
to that original imprint, that
DNA that we were talking about,
the heartbeat of the Earth.
And you move into
an altered state.
And you go in with a
very clear intention.
Like, what do you
want to find out?
And it starts appearing to you
in either any of those senses
that we talked
about, those clairs.
It might not be visual
like on a visual screen,
but that knowingness,
which is claircognitive
will come through.
That's journeying.
>>REGINA: So what about
for people who are--
they're alone somewhere in the
world but they want to do this?
There are so many
sacred types of drumming
recordings that are out there.
So you can-- would
you recommend people
do that or get their own drum
and just do their own thing?
>>ENGELS-SMITH: Both.
Some people really like
to drum for themselves.
And it does have a very
soothing, altering feel to it.
And/or getting any of those CDs.
I mean, there's so many.
>>REGINA: So many.
>>ENGELS-SMITH:
--free on YouTube now.
You can just pull them up.
The thing that's
important, though,
is it's not real
rhythmic, that it's
kind of a monotone type
of thing in the drumming.
And you can do it anywhere.
Or people will say, well,
I don't want to use a drum.
That's OK, but try it first,
because you can look up
studies of drumming
with people that
are hooked up to instruments
to do their brain measurement.
>>REGINA: EEG.
>>ENGELS-SMITH: Mm-hmm.
EEG.
And it just takes it off
the charts in the altering,
much more than
meditation even can.
>>REGINA: It make sense, because
you are going into a trance
very quickly.
>>ENGELS-SMITH: Mm-hmm.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>ENGELS-SMITH: Yeah.
And there's, like I said,
several YouTube things
that actually show this,
and it's very convincing.
Yeah, use a drum.
[LAUGHS]
>>REGINA: OK, good.
So it doesn't matter
where you are,
that you don't have to
even go to a workshop,
although they're lovely.
You can start today.
OK.
So I want to get to the
notion that it's not just us.
Other things are
interfering with us.
There are people that are not
wishing us well sometimes.
And talk about the child
with night terrors.
>>ENGELS-SMITH: [LAUGHS]
>>REGINA: It's such
an interesting story,
the whole thing.
>>ENGELS-SMITH: It is.
It is a very interesting story.
And again, this story happened
pretty early on in my career.
And I hadn't learned
about curses yet.
I hadn't had any coursework
in that type of thing.
And a woman brought
her child to me
that was having night terrors.
And they were very
almost vicious, you know?
People that have
night terrors are
very different from a nightmare
in that you can't wake them up.
And they sound like
they're being tortured
or there's growling often.
And the more you shake them
and try to wake them up,
the deeper they go
into the terror.
So it's counterproductive
of trying to help them
in the classical way.
And so anyway, she
brought the child in.
And I said, well, I'll
give it a try, you know?
And I was going to do a soul
retrieval, which is what
I did most of my practice with.
But I got into this
journey, and it was really
kind of stereotypical in that
there was this little African
pygmy person standing there.
And he had a spear
in his hand and he
had grass pompoms
around his wrist
and his ankle, a grass skirt.
You know, he's like
[HIGH-PITCHED GIBBERISH]..
He's just screaming at me
in some kind of gibberish,
you know?
And I was like, whoa.
[LAUGHTER]
And my spirit
helpers were saying
that this child had a curse
on him from another lifetime,
and the way it's showing
up in this lifetime then
is through the night terrors.
And they said, you have
to break the curse.
I said, [LAUGHS] I don't
know how to do that.
>>REGINA: They didn't train us
for that back in med school.
>>ENGELS-SMITH:
[LAUGHS] Exactly.
And so they said, just
follow my directions
and we'll do it for you.
So I did.
And the next thing I
knew, the little guy
became very deflated,
almost like a balloon
that lost its air,
dropped his spear,
and just kind of sulked off.
>>REGINA: The little pygmy.
>>ENGELS-SMITH: Yeah,
the little pygmy.
So I came back and
finished the soul retrieval
and doing the other things, and
told the woman and the child,
let me know how it goes.
But--
>>REGINA: You didn't
tell the parent
about the pygmy, did you?
>>ENGELS-SMITH: I told her.
Yeah, I told her.
>>REGINA: Oh, you did?
So she knew what was going on?
>>ENGELS-SMITH: Yeah.
>>REGINA: She was OK with that?
I just said there was a curse
from a different lifetime.
And I don't remember
the details back then.
Now I do everything aloud.
This was a long time ago.
So anyway, they left my office.
And I go in and I clean
everything with sage.
And I'm cleaning my little area
and my tools and everything
that I use.
And the next thing I hear
is this, boom, boom, boom.
And I ran out into
the dining room,
and this African mask had
literally jumped off the wall
and slid on the wood floors
underneath the dining room
table.
And of course, it's
black with grass hair.
[LAUGHTER]
And it's a mask--
it's the first piece of
artifact that I had collected.
I have a lot of
tribal artifacts.
And I was 22 when I
got it just randomly.
And I looked at it
and I said, so what
do you know about curses?
And I took him into my office,
and I journeyed with him.
And he said, you
know, you were really
in a very precarious
situation, but I'm here,
and I'll be an ally to you.
And when I show up,
you'll know that it's
a curse you're working with.
And I'll make you
invisible, because you
don't want to be seen in
that realm by the cursors.
And so I was like, OK.
So I guess this is--
I'm going to get some
training here, you know?
On how to do this.
>>REGINA: There's your sign.
>>ENGELS-SMITH: Yeah,
there's my sign.
So then I went in and I turned
on the TV to watch Oprah back
in the days when she was on.
And what's the topic?
Night terrors.
>>REGINA: [LAUGHS]
There's your other sign.
>>ENGELS-SMITH:
Yeah, my other sign.
And how there is
no cure for them.
They give you drugs that
are just anti-hallucinogens,
and they just kind
of flatline people.
And the parents were on
there, spouses, psychiatrists,
and they were just talking
about how they have no--
they don't know
what causes them.
And I thought, here I have been
given this beautiful experience
to say, I know how to help this.
You know, I know how to help.
And I can train
people how to do this.
And this is an answer.
Like, [GASP].
I said, I can envision
myself calling up the studio.
Oh, hey, Oprah?
I just got some information.
[LAUGHS]
>>REGINA: Yeah.
Yeah, no.
I mean, that's fascinating.
Did you ultimately
end up teaching this?
>>ENGELS-SMITH: Oh, yeah.
>>REGINA: Did other
people come to you
with these situations
where family members had
night terrors?
>>ENGELS-SMITH: Yes.
And all of them,
as far as I know,
have been cured
of them from that.
In fact, I have a
Curse Unraveling class
in a couple weeks.
[LAUGHS]
>>REGINA: Oh, wonderful.
Glad to hear that.
And I assume that comes
up every now and then.
>>ENGELS-SMITH: It
does, but you have
to have training
to get in there.
You have to know
what you're doing.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
They have to have been
through some other things.
>>ENGELS-SMITH: Yeah.
>>REGINA: So Jan, we're
about out of time.
So any final thoughts?
We have so much
we can talk about.
Final thoughts of
anything we have not
squeezed into our
conversation that you think
is really important for
people to know right now.
>>ENGELS-SMITH:
Well, final thoughts.
I think that there's
a saying that says--
there's two sayings.
The darkest hour is
just before dawn.
And the other one is that
you can't solve a problem
at the level of the problem.
The solution has got to
be at a different level.
And to me, what
that is saying is
you have to be at a higher
vibration to look at things
and to feel them
and to understand
them to be able to find a
solution that actually merits
the types of changes
that we ultimately want.
And for myself, I have
this incessant need
to help people be well.
I just think that life is to
be enjoyed and to be happy
and to not have to be
burdened with the things that
are burdening us.
There's healings
and possibilities
available to people.
>>REGINA: But we need to
come to rely on each other.
Let each other in
a little bit more.
Help each other a
little bit more.
Practice loving
kindness and not be
afraid to let go the parts of
us that aren't working anymore
for us.
>>ENGELS-SMITH: Absolutely.
That's the--
>>REGINA: Coming full circle.
>>ENGELS-SMITH: Yeah, that's
the medicine of the north.
Let it go.
>>REGINA: Medicine of the
north, letting go, OK.
That's a big one.
Let that north wind blow.
>>ENGELS-SMITH: Yeah, exactly.
>>REGINA: Jan, thank you
so much for joining us.
I know everybody's always
soothed by your messages.
It was really lovely
having you here again.
>>ENGELS-SMITH: Oh,
thank you, Regina.
I just think that
what you are doing
is just outstanding,
and Gaia, and you guys
are changing the world.
>>REGINA: Well, it's a place
of refuge for a lot of people
right now.
>>ENGELS-SMITH: Mm-hmm.
It is.
>>REGINA: Yes, indeed.
>>ENGELS-SMITH: Thank you.
OK.
[LAUGHS]
>>REGINA: To join with
Jan's work, her workshops,
her meditations, and so forth,
you can go to lightsong.net.
Until next time, thank
you for joining us here
on "Open Minds."
[THEME MUSIC]